these hands are all permanent so we
don't we never till we use black tarts
to clear them in wait a minute you never
tell I don't never tell we don't sell we
just when we're done with this crops now
we're harvesting here we're at today's
farm future Quebec Canada another rainy
day so we've got the umbrella
JME fourth year the market gardener
where is he
I don't know we're going to go find him
he'd be working out in the field when I
contacted my friend I don't know if you
know it's going to rain but sometimes in
farming it doesn't matter if it's
raining you got to do what you got to do
very nice place but we constant equal
cost oh my word what is just played
[Music]
raining we can change our world around
waiting we can raise the Fertile chamois
never come
oh absolutely beautiful garden bed I
love what he's doing with mixing the
things together it's not the most
beautiful gardens you've ever seen
comfrey all kinds of things planning on
this mound absolutely beautiful Market
Garden here excuse me you know we're
genius you know where JM is no didn't
know didn't know it's not up up maybe we
found in mornin don't talk about my crew
I am yeah nice to meet you bud hi
Rebecca nice to meet you the mother I am
alright now that's what we do
hey guys hi where you guys coming from
oh she's not warm there yeah this is why
you are texting this I wasn't either
yeah you can get really dirty here
like you can put mud everywhere you want
and is awesome okay is it mom see and
then mom dildo like no this is saying
thanks jam that's not the case as we
walk here alright so this is an
experimental farm there's a faster Pig
and free-range chickens and there's beef
that our mob grazing pastures around an
8 8 acre market guard yeah it's a really
big project we started this project
three years ago it's financed by the
super wealthy business person that
wanted to give the legacy of hope for
for legacy yeah and so me and a bunch of
other designers permaculture designers
design the Market Garden to be quite big
excusing pretty much the same techniques
that I've come up with in my book and in
my work
but we've kind of like made it more
massive so that we can train more people
that's the purpose here and experiment
using new tools and techniques it's cool
what's the name of your book so that's
the market gardener okay and it talks
about making a livelihood on 1.5 acres
and so small small-scale farming and no
tractor tools but you know people that
read the book they they get inspired by
it because you can make a really good
living doing that but you need to you
know have certain techniques and tools
that are appropriate for what you do and
strategy management energies to you know
grow 40 to 50 different veggies at the
same time so we're not even I can say
quite successful at this for a while
this is going to be my 16th growing
season eyes and but now this would this
project was kind of a stretch my rubber
band to the max because now we're doing
four times more production we've doubled
the team but we've added a lot of key
features on the site like flowering
hedgerows to attract beneficial insects
and birds and pollinators and that's
what's over here yeah these are going to
show me what's in that oh yeah
well they're all there it's a guild of
different flag so our either attracting
beneficials or attracting Birds yeah
with the birds house because you know
the birds when they nest they eat a lot
of insects like a lot yeah so you know
these guys are coming down and if
there's I don't know cucumber Beals or
whatever you guys will come down and eat
some of them so we're trying to recreate
an ecosystem that will generate so much
activity yes that you know pests won't
have room to establish themselves okay
so why hedgerows it on contour or what's
the point of that is getting it elevated
okay is because they're also wind breaks
okay so they're actually dual purpose
there's wind breaks between each field
blocks yes
and also you know habitats for a kind of
Longwood you have planted in there I
don't know all their names actually
that's where the designer crew came
really useful okay
but what I get when we started that
project and I don't know how geeky you
want me to be with it gave them a list
of ten insects that were problematic
yeah and then they research predatory
insects of these and then they
established which habitats these last
and then we form gills on a but we
didn't know if it would work did it and
well we wish that we're figuring it out
finding in it so how long did it has Rev
in there that they had third season okay
so you can see the birds coming back and
forth okay nine you see them yeah I
don't know what they're called in
English these in Holmdel they're blue
and then they have like v-shape yeah I
don't know Carol I think I know okay
these beds are all permanent so we don't
we never till we use black tarts to
clear the bed wait a minute you never
tell an Amex no we don't fill we just
when we're done with this crops and I
were harvesting here and you guys if you
want these are that look career he's got
a snack Wow you can pick those and
they're awesome they're all free you
always are off statistic 25 cents each
so we we do intense bio intensive
production here so we are creating super
healthy soil
because we don't turn it we don't rotor
to it and then we can gang up the crops
really close together yeah so that the
least they form a canopy but create like
a cover which is good for the soil and
the insects and the animals missile and
when we're done we just put a black tarp
over it that's what's happened here you
can done in a black carpet how long do
you keep the black tarp on it well the
depends what was there before but it's
just killed over there well once this is
dead and it's all of that another and we
just use another tool called the Harrow
which is about an inch and we just
recreate a new seed bed and we plant
right back okay okay disseminating that
tool again a Harrow okay power Harrow
people visit my website they'll see all
the tools that I use all right what's
the name your website the market Gartner
comma really fast
come on mr. Brown you got to get one
he's grabbing weeds
oh so much fun good ones today here grab
it there yeah pull that right out of
there but let's get the dirt off of it
but let me help you
this is I shared that with the kids as
you try to delicious yeah Wow
juicy soaked not I think Godzilla would
start spending 4 million bucks okay I
found the intensive spacing is
everything in here permanent Betty whoa
that's why you can invest in the
landscape because these beds you know
they're there forever
yes and then and they're worth a lot
there's about 400 to 800 dollars of
production for best then we'll cycle
those have two or three or four harvests
Four Seasons Wow and so by intensifying
everything you generate more revenues
per square feet and you are you become
more efficient now so if I can say that
one of my fame to claim if I can say
that I don't use a tractor so I advocate
young farmers not to start with a
tractor
I think the tractor is a problem in most
farms they know what they want that's
the first thing well yet you know they
love the tractors but you want to have a
toy go get a tractor but just look
spacing here doesn't allow a tractor
there's your tractor right there exactly
the worm I'll kill it it up right in the
soil right there on the surface and
that's why we don't plow yeah these days
of doing a log coming back before
chewing up and also under the black
cards this is their preferred habitat
because the soil is covered they really
dig it you know so we're creating
natural systems but also streamlining a
lot of how we work to become really
efficient and that's how we're able to
have a you know a good life to not just
like words like maniacs cool
Hemi hours a week do work how we work
like 45 gr oh wow
we work that the crew started today and
they'll be gone in five thirty night
that's about your tunnel tears it's not
a stupid
Caesar caterpillars on caterpillar
tunnel so we can put them here for the
start of the season and we'll move them
again in the summer so they're all
simple they're less than $1 per square
feet the built but they're they really
work less than a dollar per spur clean
so you don't have any like mega
greenhouses yeah we do on the let's have
a roll - yeah you'll be will be kind of
blown away by that
okay and so we use these early on in the
spring and in the fall for do for early
crops and in the summer will either put
shake pot over them or we'll just remove
the plastic okay nice and everybody
snack on turnips S&O here when Quebec so
we're a and it's been really cold spring
yeah we're still pumping out nice stuff
yeah all these techniques caterpillar
tunnels and we're using row cover
next up cucumbers so you're going to be
excited about that
you got any two pound cucumbers jam two
pounds I'm not sure about that we might
find one what you find one that means
that somebody's injured their job
because they're supposed to take them
everything Jenna sighs Ben don't need a
two pound cucumber in one day all right
just so I put your cucumber up there
holy heck two pounds and three ounces
you think you can really eat that today
ah okay you don't have to only if you
want to yeah
you know John Mac Wow hey when are you
gonna get started oh wow okay he's
diving info
the thing takes up more than your entire
flight yeah those are huge look that
there's humongous whoo good Monday do
you know it is so that now we're in
Montreal nation here Quebec Canada
everything is hockey and so the famous
Michelle convenience and so that's the
first goaltender to wear a mask and his
name is Jacques town which is plant and
the owner of the farm is cited that he
would be like the toad of the guardian
of the dark this is so cool I love it
come free this is just so encouraging to
see all this why aren't more people
doing it well people are rediscovering
all the ways of farming this this used
to be like that in France we used to
have a hedgerows like these everywhere
we're just bringing you just bringing
back old oh ways yeah old ways with new
new new systems and new ways of looking
at production so you know this is like
salad mix and it solves mix in the
fields and diversity and then the
hedgerows around it
not that you're weeding with the tarps
isn't that easier
yeah because hundreds of times the tarp
triggers the growth of dormant weed
seeds yeah because it's warm its moist
and it's dark so we'd simply germinate
and then there's no lights they die so
we use that a lot mmm there any leaching
of plastic nope cool these are all
silage tarts you retreated
LT good for any many many years nice I'm
not doing as my salads but I've a story
if you like in
u.s. deparment we had harvest everything
oh so okay yeah okay that's why we have
knee packs because we're honor ok oh
yeah everything so the revolution is
that we're moving away from farms where
everything's mechanized and boring and
farms that are smaller or vibrant a lot
of things happening and the crew gets to
pick this and pick that do this and do
that they doing four or five different
chores every day so it keeps them happy
we're still productive and it's just
another level of energy putting into all
of this and then people eating this food
I'm feeling it too yeah and and so
that's what I've been kind of doing and
pretty preaching and voting for it for a
while and my call is that we need to
replace mass production with production
by the mass yeah people into doing this
like and you can make a really nice
living you can in the countryside it's a
lot of work but you know so it is you
how much were you able to make on your
one and a half acres 150 k9 yeah for it
for a very long time
yeah and still today you know the farm
is just we're at that kind of same
acreage and we're reaching the sales
every year but the costs are not so
expensive rocketing would hand - this is
not that crazy and anybody could do this
even if they don't own the land they
could away you're doing this you don't
know I don't like what you need though
is to know what you're doing yeah so you
can't improvise all of this so you got
to know the basics and and how did they
learn the basics well most people learn
by doing it but you read the market
gardener that's a good step but if you
if you can follow in the footsteps of a
successful grower that knows what
they're doing
that's really the key to like a baker
you know yeah you can make bread but are
you going to be a baker like making
bread and being a baker and running a
bakery is - yeah but you can still
become one but you need to get training
and you need to at least have a little
bit
run a bakery use their old hand tools
that's the Harrow I was telling you
about this is it yeah this is it mounted
on a VCS and so that's the two-wheel
tractors so we don't use the tractor but
we the two-wheel tractor it's more
adapted for human scale farming and push
Cedars and hoes and all sorts of
different tools that are all hand
operated and on my farm you know these
are all the tools that we use on this
farm we're just scaling up so instead of
having one VCS we have two okay and so
but that's we're here to teach people
how to create you know who vessel farms
using these hand tools what's what we
call this right now to implement that's
the power sheriff it's used to work the
soil but not disturb it that doesn't
inverse it has times that sphere instead
of like so you're not springing you're
not mixing your soil you're not
destroying the habitat or the air or you
just kind of like steering like slow go
working on an inch you like the tool
section by you like that tractor that's
the only tractor uses on this big old
farm onward to the greenhouses wait a
minute tomatoes it is cold out there you
guys see how we're dressed up you're
up you guys can pick tomato but
only some really red red one Wow do it
I'm gonna move
yeah exactly like super red one I love
Tomatoes
[Music]
Oh
cucumbers there guys yeah thank you come
man how you doing yeah I watched your
videos all time okay get it nice to meet
you data so how is it now wait a minute
you're having it you're having a
cucumber in Canada almost June and it's
cold outside look at our code
good job jam he says they they heat this
and the spring in the fall and then the
summer also in the summer so heat loving
crops but in the winter they turn it off
and grow cold cold hardy crops in here
yep turn it off in salads and
strawberries
nice well we kicked them out but
strawberries were in there these bags
they're here the heat is actually
circulating through there that's got
holes in it Oh strawberries are you
taking advantage here of space and
you're going to grow up here and down
below or not not now but in the in the
spring there's something underneath
there's spinach growing and then we
bring these boxes from the cold room
okay and so the strawberries are dormant
so we bring them out and then we put
them here and then these they grow and
then there's spinach that we're
harvesting underneath
I was sown in September and so we're
harvesting strawberries in April Wow
I bet your customers are loving that
yeah and they're super good like there's
sweet strawberries like not the
California stuff what are the rubber
bands on your hand for harvesting okay
ah yeah we rally right there
grab your Bunch
so I was harvesting so they're growing
outside in the summer okay then come
fall we'll pop them
okay and we'll bring them inside the
cold okay make a fridge yeah and they'll
stay in the fridge for like four months
okay and then we'll bring them out and
then they'll grow okay if you put them
in here yeah is it heated in here and
when you're doing it well it's about
heat it that's like in March like yeah
yeah yeah check it out it's something
whoa
yeah oh no big ones eh I just want to
keep one you can have this one it's too
big too so yeah
what's your name what's your role here
my name is Ryan and I'm a market
gardener here with JM we harvest we
plant we wash we sell where you from
just east of Toronto in Ontario okay
yeah good good work you guys are doing
here
thanks man thank you Ryan's an awesome
guy Sam okay you guys talked up on
cucumbers they're coming out of every
pocket little mr. Brown's got a little
cue coming you need a little help yeah
take a photo
you got a new fan mr. brother your name
number-one fan hey you better keep that
up
what's your name where you from my name
is Kenner and I'm from New Zealand okay
sir come to grow the cucumbers Vidya
are you going back to New Zealand
starting a farm yeah it's a eventual
plan but at the moment I don't know when
I want to go back to places a lot to
learn out here I know
yeah interesting North America maybe not
at 80 biggie cucumber
okay you got your little itty-bitty
cucumber you ready
you have to get it in there please hey
guys anyway let's go to the time I know
he's going to forget that cucumber
cucumber okay we're going to find out
we're going to be like that in my Genki
clothes off for mr. philosopher is that
smell a decision look Eric we could pull
carrot that's that plan nope don't want
to do that walk to the side there yeah
then you just be happy and to on your
own a bunch over here pull right here
down there no no no no no no no right
here
pull that one it's a baby carrot like
you
you guys love carrot now it's going to
be the best party ever take me I'm sure
it a big one yeah eggwin up Lamoni clean
offices okay you gotta take off your
jacket come all right good good
hey go get in
can you clean off this care we have a
big one for Papa yeah thank you I am
here for me gonna watch it okay guys I
want to show you something else we can
eat those
these are baby cucumbers and they're
really good
it was very good oh my gosh so good
you're done
you ate your carrot ah buddy so how are
you different in Eliot Coleman hmm
younger so you're the new Eliot Coleman
I would say Todd
hell yeah it's going to be 77 so okay
I'm following in his footsteps and I
always been fired by not only his work
but how genuine he is and yeah that is
really cool yeah just doing things
differently same kind of model but kind
of steering is in different directions
yeah I think I see more permaculture
here yeah you had a plant come on yeah
um which said you know it's like new
ideas also you know like you have ways
of thinking about stuff and like where
you're using the plastic it is not that
yeah and you know you're friends with
Curtis like crest stone and also all of
this new way of looking at productions
yeah high yields like pumping it out and
talking about money and this kind of
yeah and in marketing to I mean we're
does a new way of marketing now yep with
the internet social media natural
farming natural market gardening like
we're I'm really big into that like
cycles or systems and ecology button
design and workflows prices and
management and all of that oh this is a
really important internal yes we're
going to go to the chickens notice the
kids all got some oh yeah they got their
lawn chair oh that's okay yeah they have
two cucumbers and again they're ready to
go you got a lot of the writing I think
for real food like every every two or
three week we go here on the local
poutine poutine is the famous food
enough yeah what is that it's french
fries gravy and Kurt you can I find that
organic no the only by three feet and
kind of like that comfort food that we
eat here
once in a while so we would accrue we go
there once in a while
yep hotdogs and just see that for an
idea make this beautiful filter garlic
thank you folks Chris draw mobile
chicken coop rearrange chicken and
really awesome we move around in this
area here do you remember the others
light the other following the the cattle
just like Joel Doug huh for you guys
alright but the fact that we're doing
this here in Quebec is is revolutionary
everything because because we have
quotas here in Quebec where if you want
to have a hundred or more chickens you
need to buy a folder from the government
Wow and so on the quotas are like $250
particular Wow yeah and so nobody's
growing free-range farm eggs no and
we're basically kind of the not the only
ones that were and we're promoting this
and we're talking about it and it's kind
of opening up a lot of doors for others
[Music]
maybe we should hope against the ah
maybe save plays all the time is now
should ever see
[Music]
[Applause]
then you can
[Music]
maybe we can change our world around
Jane has invited us to lunch at the
garage what it is garage glass rally you
kidding me this is some garage your man
take your pants off too I can get that
pants off
just don't sit on anything oh my gosh
you gotta see this
check it out
they don't play here do they forget it's
just the way farmer should be treated
right
man like your way you teach your farmers
there you know we're expecting a lot of
them yeah
so lunch is a good place for us to be
and this is a building that serves like
a lot of different purpose but we get to
eat here we wrap up we fry King yeah all
fresh fruit from the dark do you have a
chef there's a commercial kitchen down
there so they're transforming a lot of
the stuff but they're also taking an
hour at the fair meals of the stop night
we welcome have some Miko not part of
the integrated fun yeah
[Music]
come on
that's yeah Eddie said are all right JM
thank you so much Sarah go I'm going
back to the battlefield I know you're
going back to the battlefield you've
been rested put up in this nice
accommodation it's just not what farmers
the service is not it is not is this
stone I'm okay I really appreciate this
guy for investing in this yes and really
believe in it and pushing the movement
forward so thank you for joining that
mission with him all right safe travels
thank you for the tour see in North
Carolina okay right hey everybody give
me power
he's like what do I do with that okay
there mr. Brown
it is red all right yeah
I can't get out of here just to point
peak you don't want to leave do you what
you bend but it's kind of cold outside
but here it is this is the book that he
wrote check it out
the market gardener will leave a link in
the description
[Music]